hello this is module 4.3
mosfet dc characterization so the
coverage of this module
is shown here so it is mosfet
fundamentals
i'm calculating voltages between mosfet
terminals determining regions of
operation
drain current calculation and mosfet
characterization with bias circuits
so in this slide
it shows the pmos and the nmos
transistors
symbols and as you can see
um there is a gate terminal a source in
a drain terminal
and same here
what is important when you calculate
mosfet circuits
is to discern the voltages vgs and vds
for nmos and vsg and vsd for pmos
so due to the oxide present in the gate
terminal in mosfet so remember that
in in the physics structure of a mosfet
there's an oxide here and oxide there
and then oxide is effectively an
insulator
so therefore gate current is zero
so if git current is zero we can say
that is
equals id same here
and therefore compared to bjts there is
only one current
to be calculated for mosfets
another thing to note here is to
remember the positioning of the arrow
because the arrow defines where the
source is
for either nmos and pmos so for a pmos
the arrow is going in and for the nmos
it's going out
so guide in solving mosfet circuits so
how do you solve mosfet circuits
well the first step is to identify the
gate
the source and the drain terminals
so as as i've said earlier the terminal
with an arrow
outward if nmos and inward the pmos is
always the source the other terminal
without an
arrow is always the drain and the
terminal in between the mosfet
is the gate so the next step if you
if you are successful in identifying the
terminals
so solve for the important voltages
across the terminals of the transistor
using fundamental circuit techniques
take note
of the voltage polarities so remember
the nmos and the pmos
they have different polarities
when calculating so remember
vsvgs and vds for nmos and vsg
and vsd for pmos next step
from the voltages determine the
operating region of the transistor
and identify the applicable during
current equation
so if you want if you want to
master this this part you revis you can
revisit module 4.2
for determining the operating region so
now
just take note of these two some
problems will give the operating regions
given or a required design choice
take note of this if the operating
region can't be determined
or if you calculated vgs and vds and
they are dependent on
some variables and there is no fixed
value
assume that the transistor is in
saturation and check
if this assumption is correct so see
some um
we're gonna discuss the third sample
problem to show
this uh guide this part of the guide
so the next step is if you have
determined the correct
drain current equation use this equation
to solve for the drink current of the
mosfet
so take note of the current direction
and parameter units remember that there
is no current going to or from the gate
e ig is equal to zero and then from this
current equation
you can use these equations
to solve for other quantities needed in
the mosfet circuit
so um in to show
this guide to show the effectiveness of
this kind we will calculate some
example problems so the first sample
problem
so given that the enmotion sister is
characterized to have 2000 microamps per
volt squared
and vth equals 0.4 volts and the
transistor is biased with vx equals 0.8
find the region's operation the drain
current
if channeler modulation is negligible
and drain current if there is channel
and modulation and characterized to have
this parameter
so the first question the region of
operation
so the first step is to discern vgs and
vds so remember
that the arrow is always the source the
terminal with an arrow is always the
source
and the terminal without an arrow is the
drain and the
middle is the gate so you calculate vgs
so it's vx minus zero and calculate
pds which is five volts minus zero so as
you can see it's here
and then remember that we must find the
region of operation
so for this example this transistor
is in the saturation region because vgs
is greater than vth
and vds is greater than vgs minus vth
which is
shown here so because it is in such
in the saturation region
we can calculate the drain current so
because the channel length modulation is
negligible we will use this equation
which does not include the channel
length modulation
and then we substitute the values shown
here
as you can see the process
transconductance is 2 000 micrograms per
volt squared
and then vx vgs is vx minus 0. so it's
0.8
minus vth and then we calculate we get
160 microamps
and then if we want to calculate the
the current when there is channel
modulation we will use this equation
now this we include this part which
considers the channel length modulation
and then we substitute all the values
here so 2000
uh the process transconductance kn
and then vgs is 0.8 vth is 0.4
and then we substitute the channel
modulation parameter and vds
and then you get 176 micrograms so as
you can see
because there is channel and modulation
the drain current
is increased now
let's move on to the second sample
problem so now we have a pmos transistor
so it has a uh processor conductance so
4500 microamps per volt squared
and vth is negative 0.8 volts and its
bias with vm equals 0.8
so we need to find the resistance of
resistor rb so that v out is 2.8
assume channel length modulation is
negligible so the first step
is to discern vgs and vds
or for this pmos is sg and sd
so what are we gonna do first step is to
find the
region of operation so for the drain
current and then
solve for the resistance using ohm's law
so first step find the transistor's
region operation
so vsg is shown here so it's 3 volts
minus value of vm which is 0.8
so we get 2.2 and vsd we want
the value to be 2.8 here
so therefore it's 3 volts minus 2.8 to
be 0.2
so as you can see from this voltages we
can now
find the region of operation because vgs
or vsg for the pmos is greater than vthp
as you can see here and then the vsd is
between 0 and vsg minus the absolute
value of bthp
so therefore this one is in the linear
region
so because the pmos is operating in the
linear or the tried region use the
equation
this one so this is the equation for a
linear
[Music]
for the pmos operating in the linear
region
so remember that this is ids and it's
negative
so in order for us to have a simpler
simpler calculation we just reverse the
current
direction so this ids going there so we
just reverse it
so we get the positive so we use this
equation
isd equals kp vsg minus vt hp must be
the sd over 2 time all multiplied by v
st and then what we're gonna what we're
gonna do next is to substitute
everything so it everything's given
the process transconductance is here the
threshold is here
and the bias is here we substitute
everything here and we get 1.17
milliamps
from the current calculations we can now
solve for the resistance
using ohm's law so rb is v
out over the current so remember there
is no gate current
so all isd is isd also here
so we substitute all the values and we
get 2.39 kilo ohms
so now let's move on to the third
problem this is more difficult but
i hope you can understand the that the
process is the same for any mosfet
circuit
you encounter so for this one given that
the pmos transistor shown is
characterized to have
these parameters so kp is 500 microns
per volt squared
and vthp is negative 0.3 volts and its
bias
using a resistive divider shown here
with
rx equals 1 kilo ohm and roi is 2 kilo
ohm find the voltage v
out if rb is 10 kilo ohms assume the
channel
modulation is negligible
so what's what are the steps so the
first step is to solve for the crucial
voltages of the pmos in the circuit
find the region of operation calculate
the drain current and solve for v out
using ohm's law
so as you can see instead of having a
direct voltage here we have a resistive
divider
so now because there is no current
going into the gate so vm this one
can be calculated using voltage division
because there's no there's no gate
current
so you can see shown here so we get that
vm is 2 volts
then what's next so the next is to find
the transistor's region of operation
so if we want to find this we get vsg
and vst so vsg is 3 volts
minus two volts from what we calculated
earlier so we got one volt
and then vst is three volts minus vl
so now here's the here's the problem
because the value of the
value of vsd depends on v
out the region of operation can either
be linear or saturation
so in cases like this if the region of
the operation of the transistor is not
definite in a characterization or design
problem
assume assume that the transistor is in
saturation and check the voltage results
later
if the assumption is true if the
assumption is false
redo the solution with the assumption
that the linear is operating in the
linear or triad region
so now because we don't know if this is
linear or saturation we're going to
assume
first that it is saturation
as shown here so because we assume that
this is in saturation we're going to use
the ideal saturation equation of the
pmos drain current
so channel modulation is negligible so
this is constant
the constant equation so we substitute
everything so that the processor
conductance is 500 microamps per volt
squared
and then vsg is 1 volt
from earlier and then the threshold
voltage
is negative 0.3 remember to absolute
value this
avoid avoid not including this because
this will be confusing later on
and you will get this value 122.5
microamps
and then we can calculate the voltage
using ohm's law
because remember there is no gate
current here
therefore all the current in here will
be the current here
substitute everything you will get 1.225
volts
now because this answer
is from the assumption that the pmos is
in saturation
you must verify this first before you
accept it as your final answer
so now we just redo what we did earlier
so we find the transistor's region of
operation
so we get vsg is 1 volt and then vsd is
1.775 volts
so from the saturation requirements
shown here we must check if they are
true
so the first one is true and the second
one
one point seven seven five is actually
greater than one volt
minus negative um point the absolute
value of negative point three volts
therefore this answer is the correct
answer because
the transistor is actually in the
saturation region
so that ends this lecture